opentelemetry.io: instrumentation docs page (#243)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-erlang: website_docs/instrumentation.md

`Tracer` is not in a module, for example when using the interactive shell, the
default `Tracer` is used.

Each OTP Application has a `Tracer` registered for it when the `opentelemetry`
Application boots. This can be disabled by setting the Application environment
variable `register_loaded_applications` to `false`. If you want a more specific
named `Tracer` or disable the automatic registration you can register a `Tracer`
either with a name and version or with an Application name and
`opentelemetry` will get the version from the loaded Application. Examples:

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
opentelemetry:register_tracer(test_tracer, <<"0.1.0">>),
opentelemetry:register_application_tracer(myapp),
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
OpenTelemetry.register_tracer(:test_tracer, "0.1.0")
OpenTelemetry.register_application_tracer(:myapp)
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

Giving names to each `Tracer`, and in the case of Erlang/Elixir having that name
be the name of the Application, allows for the ability to blacklist traces from
a particular Application. This can be useful if, for example, a dependency turns
out to be generating too many or in some way problematic spans and it is desired

> to disable their generation.

Reviewer: Is the matching of app-to-tracer done on a module basis or on a group_leader/process hierarchy basis? I.e. if I make an app an included app, or that I call code from a library app within a stateful app, which is it that shows up?

Author: It is a module basis. A persistent term is used to map module to tracer so that the macro can lookup the tracer with just `?MODULE`.

I wasn't sure how detailed I should get about how things actually work in this document.

Reviewer: Yeah that's probably fine and in this case it does exactly what's on the label, I was checking for accuracy.

Additionally, the name and version of the `Tracer` are exported as the
[`InstrumentationLibrary`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/glossary.md#instrumentation-library)
component of spans. This allows users to group and search spans by the
Application they came from.

You can lookup a `Tracer` by name with `get_tracer/1` and use that `Tracer`
variable to call the tracing API through `otel_tracer` in Erlang or
`OpenTelemetry.Tracer` in Elixir:

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
Tracer = opentelemetry:get_tracer(my_app),
SpanCtx = otel_tracer:start_span(Tracer, <<"hello-world">>, #{}),
...
otel_tracer:end_span(SpanCtx).
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
tracer = OpenTelemetry.get_tracer(:my_app)
span_ctx = OpenTelemetry.Tracer.start_span(tracer, "hello-world", %{})
...
OpenTelemetry.Tracer.end_span(span_ctx)
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> In most cases you will not need to manually register or lookup a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases you will not need to manually register or look up a
```

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

# Cross Service Propagators

Distributed traces extend beyond a single service, meaning some context must be
propagated across services to create the parent-child relationship between
spans. This requires cross service [_context
propagation_](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/overview.md#context-propagation),
a mechanism where identifiers for a trace are sent to remote processes.

In order to propagate trace context over the wire, a propagator must be
registered with OpenTelemetry. This can be done through configuration of the
`opentelemetry` application:

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
%% sys.config
...
{text_map_propagators, [fun otel_baggage:get_text_map_propagators/0,
                        fun otel_tracer_default:w3c_propagators/0]},
...                        
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
# runtime.exs
...
text_map_propagators:
  [&:otel_baggage.get_text_map_propagators/0,
   &:otel_tracer_default.w3c_propagators/0],
...
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

If you instead need to use the [B3 protocol](), originally from the [Zipkin

> project](), then replace `otel_tracer_default:w3c_propagators/0` and

Reviewer: missing links

### Creating Spans for New Processes

To pass spans across processes we need to start a span that isn't connected to
particular process. This can be done with the macro `start_span`. Unlike
`with_span`, the `start_span` macro does not set the new span as the currently
active span in the context of the process dictionary.

Connecting a span as a parent to a child in a new process can be done by attaching
the context and setting the new span as currently active in the process. The
whole context should be attached in order to not lose other telemetry data like
[baggage](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/baggage/api.md).

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
SpanCtx = ?start_span(<<"child">>),
Ctx = otel_ctx:get_current(),

proc_lib:spawn_link(fun() ->
                        otel_ctx:attach(Ctx),
                        ?set_current_span(SpanCtx),
                        
                        %% do work here
                        
                        ?end_span(SpanCtx)
                    end),
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
span_ctx = OpenTelemetry.Tracer.start_span(<<"child">>)

> Ctx = OpenTelemetry.Ctx.get_current()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ctx = OpenTelemetry.Ctx.get_current()
```

OpenTelemetry.Tracer.end_span(span_ctx)
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

### Linking the New Span

If the work being done by the other process is better represented as a `link` --
see [the `link` definition in the
specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/overview.md#links-between-spans)
for more on when that is appropriate
-- then the `SpanCtx` returned by `start_span` is passed to `link/1` to create
a `link` that can be passed to `with_span` or `start_span`:

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
SpanCtx = ?current_span_ctx,
proc_lib:spawn_link(fun() ->
                        %% a new process has a new context so the span created
                        %% by the following `with_span` will have no parent
                        Link = opentelemetry:link(SpanCtx),
                        ?with_span(<<"other-process">>, #{links => [Link]},
                                   fun() -> ok end)
                    end),
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
task = Task.async(fn ->
                    # a new process has a new context so the span created
                    # by the following `with_span` will have no parent

>                     link = OpenTelemetry.link(parent)

Reviewer 2: Where is `parent` coming from? There probably should be line like:

```elixir
parent = OpenTelemetry.current_span_ctx()
```

Before the `Task.async/1` call.

Author: Derp, yup, fixing. Clearly I need to put all these examples into the getting started repos I have and actually run them :)
